It's Friday, October 24th, 2025, and
this place is buzzing. A popular month
to visit what's become a popular place
to visit. Waves of tourists wander the
shops and restaurants of Kokusai Street.
Splitting south, many then amble into
the covered, ever vibrant Makkeshi
Public Market. It's hot, reaching 90°
Fahrenheit or 32° C. So many visitors,
most hailing from mainland Japan, have
taken to the island's beautiful beaches
or the many national and nature parks
littering the island, exploring the
comparatively cooler climate of the
subtropical forest. And they've taken to
other islands entirely, hopping on
fairies to explore the natural beauty of
the nearby neighbors. Depending on their
interests, the tourists [music] spread.
The foodie rambles the city. The free
diver heads for the coral lined coast.
But on an island of only 463 square
miles or 1,200 km or an island 3/4 the
area of Hawaii's Aahu, there's only so
far the tourists can [music] disperse.
With some 700,000 visitors arriving a
month and a permanent population of 1.5
million, 50% larger than Aahu's, this
place is always buzzing. Of course,
Friday, October 24th, 2025 is a bit of a
holiday in itself in the United States.
Fridays in fall mean high school
football, and this school is no
different. as the KBHS Dragons are set
to host the Humphrey High School
Blackhawks for a game that will crown a
regional champion. Now, Americans
playing American football with American
parents and fans in the stands on a
school campus that neighbors a Kdoba,
Popeyes, and Burger King on one side and
the suburbs on the other is not novel,
but zoom out. This place, it turns out,
is also that place, the tiny tourist
island with the beaches. And both places
are in Japan. This is Okinawa, an island
that takes only 2 hours to drive across
from tip to tail and an island that
hosts two entirely different worlds at
once. This is the core of the American
Air Force's presence in the Pacific. And
all the America that comes with it runs
headlong into a proud distinct culture
and a densely populated people with
little wiggle room, divergent goals, an
imbalance in power, a complicated
history, and an uncertain future. For
decades, there's been a lot of this and
this and this. As worlds and ways of
life keep colliding. How things got so
hotly contested on this little island is
best summarized by the home of Kubasaki
High School's rival, Kadina High School.
With 717 kids enrolled, it's the largest
American high school in Japan. Largest
is a theme here. By personnel, at around
20,000, Kadina is the largest American
air base in the Pacific. The 18th wing,
which runs the base and is capable of
everything from fighting to resupplying
and rescuing, has the largest assortment
of planes and helicopters at around
[music] 80 pieces of equipment. The wing
support group, which handles everything
from accommodations and logistics to
budgeting, recreation, and mayoral
duties of the base, is the largest in
all the Air Force. And the base itself,
hemmed in by urban Okinawa on both
sides, boasts a golf course, countless
parks and sports fields, and a host of
suburban housing developments that from
above look like they could be from
anywhere in Middle America. How this
base ended up as the largest is directly
linked to the event that gave Okinawa
such widespread name recognition. Often
recognized as the bloodiest battle in
the Pacific, the Battle of Okinawa was
also the longest. What would prove to be
the last major battle before Japanese
surrender, overtaking these islands so
comparatively close to the Japanese
mainland took months. Making landfall in
April of 1945, US troops immediately
took the then Japanese Kadina
airirstrip. With a foothold in the
center of the island, US troops based
their assaults from the area, including
the commandeered air base. Thus, by the
time Okinawa fell, then Japan soon
surrendered. The US had already set up
operations on the island. As World War
II gave way to American occupation of
Japan, and as the battle lines of the
Cold War began taking shape with an
increasingly aggressive North Korea
looking to unify its peninsula and a
rising Chinese Communist Party, Okinawa
seemed a logical position to maintain a
US foothold. From an American
perspective, it made sense from a
Japanese perspective, too. Because of
Article [music] 9 of this document, the
1945 Constitution of Japan, the country
could not make war nor maintain an army.
Because of this treaty, for someone to
provide defense, Japan would rely on the
US, allowing the US to maintain a
presence within [music] Japan. And
because of Article 3 in this treaty,
Okinawa, should the US want to take it
on, would no longer be administered by
Japan, but would rather be run solely by
the United States. By the terms of peace
largely dictated to it from the rest of
the world, Japan had no reason to push
back on the US expanding its presence on
Okinawa. it was no longer theirs and the
bases on the island would serve to
protect their interests. For the now
allied major world powers, it made sense
to dot the strategically advantageous
island with as many bases and military
installations as it could bear. For
those on the island, well, they didn't
have much say. Beyond the beaches and
warm weather, Okinawa's draw for
tourists is its differences from the
mainland. While Japanese today and part
of Japan from 1879 to World War II,
Okanowens are proudly Okinawan, a
distinct ethnicity that celebrates a
history and heritage unique to the Ryuku
Islands. While Japan doesn't recognize
the population as a minority, the UN has
recommended considering Okanowans as an
indigenous group in order to begin
protecting the local dialect and
culture. In many ways, and after many
centuries of intermingling, there are
plenty of similarities to the rest of
Japan. But given the island's largest
city is far closer to Shanghai and Hjo
and Taipei than to Tokyo, there's plenty
of Chinese influence, too. Different
food and a more laid-back way of life
has served to bring tourists in
recently, but such differences have also
had a way of being leveraged in the
pursuits of bigger nations. The
estimates vary, but 150,000 is the
common number cited when discussing how
many Okinawans, either civilian or
conscripted by Japan, died in the Battle
of Okinawa, making them the leading
group in casualties. Stuck in the
middle, both Japanese and American
soldiers at points committed atrocities
towards the [music] local population.
Once under American command, there
really wasn't much consideration as to
Okanawan interests either. The island
adopted the US dollar. Cars drove on the
right side of the road. And as Korea
then Vietnam required more and more
attention and military resources, the US
bases expanded across much of the
island's most desirable flatlands,
pushing a growing Okinawan population to
build denser and denser cities.
Frustrated by the expanding presence and
comparatively slow economy to that of
Japan's, Okinawa pushed for a return to
Japanese rule. And in 1972, they got it.
But still a pacifist country by its
constitution and still reliant on the US
for defense, there was little reason for
Japan to question the size and quantity
of the bases. And since [music] then,
the status quo hasn't really changed.
Bases that boomed during the Cold War
have rights sized a bit, and some land
has been returned here and there, but
the map still looks like this. Within
these lines, some [music] 30,000 active
military members from all branches work,
train, and live. Accompanying them are
another 50,000 Americans that make
living there full-time possible. The
family members, the school teachers, and
the support staff working for $40,000 a
year at the grocery store or $110,000 as
a principal at the elementary school.
And within the fences of the likes of
Kadina Air Base or Camp Foster or Air
Station Futenma, there's far more than
just the novelty fast food place or high
school football stadium to remind one of
the connection [music] back to the US.
Rather, these simply are the US. With
fully developed pre-K through 12th grade
educations, after school activity
programs, recreation centers, exchanges
that effectively serve as shopping
malls, suburban developments, and single
family homes, these bases don't remind
of America, they simulate it. [music]
And for those born on these bases,
including celebrities like Robert
Griffin III or Zack Brian, they're not
born with a dual citizenship or Japanese
citizenship. They're born an American
citizen. But while fenced in, these
bases are permeable, at least in one
direction. While Okanowans aren't
welcomed into these bases, the Americans
stationed here pour out onto the larger
island. With housing at a crunch,
service members are asked to live off
base while those living on it are pushed
to explore the island when they're off
work. And this is where most problems
originate.
If you've heard Okinawa mentioned in the
news lately, it's probably because of
this video of a military policeman
brutally bodys slamming someone who
ultimately turns out to be an American
veteran over whom he had no legal
jurisdiction. Where this happened and
why is informed by [music] the uneasy
overlap of two cultures and a set of
rules agreed upon in 1960. The incident
was on Gate 2 street where Kadina Air
Base gives way to a section of Okinawa
City littered with bars and clubs
frequented by those working at the base.
The individual was approached on this
street in the early morning hours and
was demanded to show identification by
American military police. Now, the fact
that MPs are patrolling off base to
begin with may raise an eyebrow and
perhaps the concern of a local Okonawan,
but it's allowed because of the status
of forces agreement between Japan and
the US, which in this case provides that
MPs may patrol off base in special
agreed upon circumstances with
jurisdiction only over US service
members. And why the cops were out
asking for identification was because
off-base service members are banned from
drinking from 1:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m.
This ban and subsequent patrol was in
response to a set of domestic violence
cases committed by service members on
local women. The effort to curb late
night drinking is not a new strategy on
the island, and crime and sexual assault
by US service members is not a new
problem. High-profile sexual violence
and murder cases followed by massive
protests have rocked the island in the
1990s, the 2010s, [music] and the 2020s.
Adding fuel to these massive flare-ups
is the locally held belief that only a
small portion of sexual violence is
fairly reported and subsequently tried
by the Japanese and military legal
systems on the island. They make a
compelling point. Because of the same
1960s status of forces agreement between
the two countries, US forces on the
island are uniquely protected. For
crimes committed on base or on duty, the
US has primary jurisdiction. And in
these incidents, the paper trail can get
light. Through FOIA requests, one
reporter found that in pursuit of seven
separate sexual assault investigations
on the island from 2017 to 2019, none
were made public. As for arrests that
happen off base and off duty, while
these are pursued and tried through
Japan's legal system, the US still has
the right to consent to or withhold
extradition if the service member made
it back onto base. Even if apprehended
off base, the service member can't be
taken into custody for questioning
before prosecution. Together, these
protections make it far harder to build
a case and prosecute, so Japan doesn't.
From 2001 to 2018, the prosecution rate
for criminal offenses committed by US
military personnel was 13% compared to
the 44% national rate. Because of a deal
struck between Japan and the US 6
decades ago, Okinowans feel like they're
losing out on fair treatment in the
justice system, leaving them uniquely
vulnerable.
If one major complaint is structural in
a legal sense, another is structural in
the physical. A simple overhead shot
makes it glaringly obvious that the
island's most important installations
sit right next to densely populated
urban areas. Thus, accidents occurring
at one are likely to impact the other.
That much was the case when a helicopter
based at Futenma crashed into the next
door neighbor university in 2004. While
no one died, Okinowans have protested
base [music] locations and their sheer
busyness over fear that the next
accident will be the big one. With eight
[music] crashes in and around the island
in 2016 alone, with the arrival of the
accidentprone and much maligned MV22
Osprey in 2012, with the occasional
helicopter part falling and landing on
elementary school and daycare
properties, locals think it's only a
matter of time before luck runs out and
one of these many accidents [music]
turns into a tragedy. Then there's the
less dramatic but dangerous all the same
pollution leaking from these military
installations. Again, because of the
1960s status of forces agreement, it's
really difficult to get an exact picture
as to just how much pollution is
emanating from these bases and training
facilities because Japan's not allowed
to check. Only when a confirmed spill
reaches a confirmed volume can Japanese
officials go in and inspect. But
otherwise, these bases are left to their
own devices. But a foyer request from
2016 has shed some light onto what
exactly has been spilled on the island
since the 1990s. And it's a lot. Diesel
in 2011, then sewer in 2013 from Kadina,
made its way to the Hija River, which
towns in the base itself used for
drinking water. PCBs, chemicals banned
in the US in 1979, were improperly
disposed of somewhere around here in the
70s and after being mentioned by a
whistleblower sparked a testing program
that found contamination across the
base. Finally, a revelation over
chemical dumping in the ravines around
the base in the 1960s came to light in
the 2010s, causing major concern for the
residents nearby along with those
sending students to [music] these
schools. While the official statements
told residents that cleanup went well
and that there's little to worry about
going forward, 107 pages of test results
were redacted within the foyer
materials. In addition to what's been
dumped in the water and buried in the
ground, there's also the air and noise
pollution that rocks the island, too, as
jet fuel fumes and the howl of F-35s are
just part of everyday life here. But
beyond what the US does at these bases,
just the simple fact that they exist at
such a scale is a cause for major
frustration to Okinawans. 1/5if of the
entire island is taken up by the US
military. And while the island is
compensated for the land, the rent is
fairly meager when one considers the
economic potential for all this
favorable flat land. Take this swath of
land here. Since the 50s, this was the
Aasi Meadows Golf Course. According to
the Americans who played it over the
years, it was busy, beautiful, and had
an amazing and affordable restaurant in
the clubhouse. But returned back to the
island, the space serves a lot more.
There's a massive mall that's hit 10
million customers. There's high-rise
housing. There's a hospital. All things
that serve local needs and spur the
local economy. This isn't an isolated
example either. In Naha, there used to
be this, the everdispersed Makiato
housing project. In 1987, it was
returned back to Okinawa and now it's a
bustling commercial center with housing,
museums, parks, and shops. A study taken
on by the Okinawan government in 2015
calculated that the economic impact of
the area as US housing produced $33
million and after the commercial
district had been established produced
about a billion a [music] 32fold
increase. Americanstyle land use
anywhere is rather inefficient. But on
such a small island with such a massive
population, places like Kadina with its
golf course and its sprawling Merec
Park, Washington Heights, Stillwell
Park, and Sterling Heights neighborhoods
represent the height of inefficiency.
And rent for such land, should it
accurately reflect the land's value,
would prove absurdly high. But there's
little reason to think much is bound to
change here anytime soon. While the
exact contours of conflict and potential
conflict in the Far Pacific have
changed, the US strategy remains
remarkably similar to what it looked
like in the 1950s with the establishment
of the island chain strategy where the
US would contain Asian communist powers
through strategically located Pacific
island bases. Split between two island
clusters, Okinawa sits right on the
northern edge of the first island chain
and extremely close to the Chinese
mainland. Making the island feel
increasingly central is China's
increasingly aggressive stance [music]
towards Taiwan. With Kadina the nearest
American base to the island, Kadina's
role is not just to project American
might in the region, but potentially be
the first to provide it. Often referred
to as the keystone of the Pacific, no
matter the local frustrations over
flyovers and pollution, the only reason
for Katina to shrink in size or stature
would be one dictated by US military
strategists in the context of China's
maneuvering. Again, leaving history to
repeat itself and leaving Okinawans to
deal with repercussions of
decision-making by a farway power. Of
course, as a Japanese prefecture
populated by Japanese nationals, Japan
has a say in Okinawa's land allocation.
But from a larger geopolitical
standpoint, their interests align with
those of the US's, as do their security
concerns. From a defense perspective, a
bunch of bases far away from the
mainland, but near the region's biggest
threats and potential conflict zones, is
pretty optimal. Japan hears Okonaman
complaints and may even sympathize, but
national security concerns outweigh the
plight of the island. [music] In fact,
rather than questioning bases on the
main island of Okinawa, Japan has begun
positioning its own missiles on other
Okinawan islands as their own military
capabilities slowly grow. Recently,
military activity on the island has
signified that things [music] may look
different in the near future. In
November of 2025, the 18th Airwing at
Kadina undertook readiness exercise
[music] BH261.
The goal of the exercise was to test and
through the practice speed up their
ability to make runway repairs on the
fly. In press releases, it was framed as
a successful exercise. From an Okonaman
perspective, though, such an exercise is
unsettling at best. Preparing to repair
runways is an implicit recognition that
Kadina is no longer just the forward
operating base for the US Air Force in
the region, it's potentially also a
first target. Not only does Okinawa
remain at the mercy of the same large
powers that fought over it in World War
II, it's increasingly within the
crosshairs of a [music] third. For
decades, the island has called for a
change. Things are in fact changing
here, but not necessarily for the
better.
What is only getting better as time goes
on, though, if I may say so myself, is
this season of Jetlag the game. Right
now, you can get caught up on season 16
on the YouTube channel. But if you want
to get ahead, there's another way to
watch. Stay a week ahead and skip the
ads by heading over to Nebula, the
sponsor of today's video. Nebula is a
streaming platform founded by creators
for creators that has helped awesome
projects like Jetlag get off the ground.
And every day Nebula's library gets a
little bit deeper. Another exciting
project that appears on Nebula is Joe
Scott's oldest and newest places on
Earth. This takes Joe Scott out of the
studio and into the big wide world to
explore some of the most unique
geological places this planet has to
offer, making it not just educational,
but also blending elements of travel in
too. Whether it's projects like Jetlag
that release early on the platform, or
Nebula originals, production heavy
documentaries, shows, and even
full-length films that exist only on the
platform, or simply the library from
channels like this one with early
releases and no ads, if you're a fan of
our content or Joe Scots, or the dozens
upon dozens upon dozens of other
creators supporting and supported by
Nebula, there's something on this
platform for you. Across the board, this
platform has allowed us to all really
push our boundaries and take on projects
with bigger production budgets and more
creative risk. So, I'm confident there
is something in there for you. And now
is a great time to try it. Right now,
you can get an annual subscription for
50% off. And 30 bucks spread across 12
months is just 250 a month. That's a
crazy deal. So, get to it by following
the link in the description of this
video.